README.adoc, before:

= Ansible Best Practices

A collection of notes on Ansible best practices...

== Version Control

Use git version control for your playbooks, roles, and inventory.

== YAML

Ansible playbooks are first parsed as YAML and then processed.
This is important to keep in mind as errors may occur both during YAML parsing or during playbook execution.

=== Use Block Quotes

Block quotes help avoid long lines.
The `>-` operator converts line breaks to spaces.
The `|-` operator keeps newlines.

```
# Need a better example... this should use lineinfile...
- name: Add envirnoment variables
  blockinfile:
    block: |-
      MYAPP_DOMAIN=example.com
      MYAPP_DIR=/opt/myapp
```

```
- name: Run Installer Script
  command: >-
    installer.sh
    --config=example/config/path
    --domain=app23.example.com
    --enable-advanced-features
    --admin-password={{ admin_password | quote }}
  args:
    creates: /etc/example/install.log
```

```
- name: Deployment for MyApp
  k8s:
    state: present
    definition: "{{ myapp_deployment }}"
  when: >-
    myapp_install_k8s|bool or
    myapp_install_openshift|bool
```

== Idempotence

Levels of code quality:

* Ansible code works once, cannot re-run
* Check if code has run, avoids reconfiguring
* Checks can reset, reconfigure
* Reconfiguration properly indicates changes

== Inventory

=== Use an inventory directory

Ansible may be pointed to an inventory directory and will load all inventories found within the inventory directory.

=== Use `group_vars`

=== Avoid `host_vars`

Hosts should normally be grouped to specify the purpose assigned to each host.
Even if there is only one host in a group, use of groups still provides clarity.

=== Separate inventories for similar environments with common `group_vars`

This provides a simple way to separate environment specific variables from the common variables.

Separate environments by inventory.

=== Group Naming

Name groups with obvious names that describe the function of the groups.

== Playbook

=== Name your plays

Naming everything is best practice because it lets you track down errors faster.

=== Avoid `group_vars` and `host_vars`?

Using `group_vars` and `host_vars` in a playbook requires strict rules of ansible group naming which are best avoided.
It is better practice to have variables for host and group names when a playbook needs different handling depending on the host or host group.
If sets of variables need to be set based on group, try using `include_vars` instead using a check on the hosts groups (`group_names` special variable).

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
- name: Include Database Host Vars
  when: myplaybook_database_group_name in group_names
  include_vars:
    dir: vars/database/
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

== Roles

Start structuring your playbooks around use of Ansible roles early in your development process.
Role directory structure provides a standard for tasks, files, templates, modules, etc.

== Tasks

=== Name your tasks

On every task, always include `name`.

=== User `verbosity` with `debug` tasks

=== Error Handling

Do not `ignore_errors`.
Using `ignore_errors` still reports an error and is often confusing.

Use `failed_when` instead.
Using `failed_when` allows you to give your own error conditions.

https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/user_guide/playbooks_error_handling.html

=== Fail early with `assert` and `fail`

Using `fail`:

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
- name: Check for valid url
  fail:
    msg: Invalid url: {{ myapp_url }}
  when: >-
    not myapp_url.startswith('https://') or
    not myapp_url is search('/myapp/')
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Using `assert`:

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
- name: Assert valid url
  assert:
  - myapp_url.startswith('https://') or
  - myapp_url is search('/myapp/')
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

=== `command` module

* Use sparingly
* Use `quote` filter with variables
* Calling shell scripts from command?
** Template shell script and copy to host
* Don't call `ansible` or `ansible-playbook` from `command`
* Use args:
** `chdir` Set working directory for command
** `creates` Only run if file does not exist
** `removes` Only run if file exists
** `warn` Use to disable warnings when needed

=== `shell` module

Only use `shell` if you cannot use `command`

Avoid `echo` to pass input to commands, the `command` and `shell` modules both have built-in support for passing standard input.

== Variables

=== Avoid `set_fact` unless it is a fact about the host

Set vars on `include_tasks` or `include_role` instead.

=== Include all variables for configuration in `defaults/main.yml`

=== Process variables in `vars/main.yml`

=== Prefix Variable Names

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
myapp_version: latest
myapp_openshift_image: quay.io/myorg/myapp:{{ myapp_version }}
myapp_openshift_dev_nampsace: mapp-dev
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

When registering variables, use `r_` prefix.

== Testing

== Lookup Plugins

=== Use `env` for environment variables

=== Disable use of dangerous lookups

For example, `pipe`

FIXME - I believe you can provide a custom do-nothing version of plugins, but need to verify.

== Filters

Ansible provides a number of filters in addition to the core jinja2 filters.

=== Use `bool` to evaluate boolean expressions

=== Use `default` filter if a value may not be set

=== Use `json_query` filter to process complex data structures

The `json_query` filter uses the powerful JMESPath query language:

http://jmespath.org/

=== Use `quote` filter on commands

=== Use `to_json` filter in generated YAML

== Custom Modules

Custom modules are faster than running multiple tasks and are often easier.
Python programming for modules is not as hard as you may think.

== Templating with Jinja2

Ansible lets you use jinja2 templating anywhere.

=== Template indentation

Commit message:

Updating ReadMe with more best practices.
Included more information around Jinja2 and
creating your own module.

README.adoc, after:

= Ansible Best Practices

A collection of notes on Ansible best practices...

== Version Control

Use git version control for your playbooks, roles, and inventory.

== YAML

Ansible playbooks are first parsed as YAML and then processed.
This is important to keep in mind as errors may occur both during YAML parsing or during playbook execution.

=== Use Block Quotes

Block quotes help avoid long lines.
The `>-` operator converts line breaks to spaces.
The `|-` operator keeps newlines.

```
# Need a better example... this should use lineinfile...
- name: Add envirnoment variables
  blockinfile:
    block: |-
      MYAPP_DOMAIN=example.com
      MYAPP_DIR=/opt/myapp
```

```
- name: Run Installer Script
  command: >-
    installer.sh
    --config=example/config/path
    --domain=app23.example.com
    --enable-advanced-features
    --admin-password={{ admin_password | quote }}
  args:
    creates: /etc/example/install.log
```

```
- name: Deployment for MyApp
  k8s:
    state: present
    definition: "{{ myapp_deployment }}"
  when: >-
    myapp_install_k8s|bool or
    myapp_install_openshift|bool
```

== Idempotence

Levels of code quality:

* Ansible code works once, cannot re-run
* Check if code has run, avoids reconfiguring
* Checks can reset, reconfigure
* Reconfiguration properly indicates changes

== Inventory

=== Use an inventory directory

Ansible may be pointed to an inventory directory and will load all inventories found within the inventory directory.

=== Use `group_vars`

=== Avoid `host_vars`

Hosts should normally be grouped to specify the purpose assigned to each host.
Even if there is only one host in a group, use of groups still provides clarity.

=== Separate inventories for similar environments with common `group_vars`

This provides a simple way to separate environment specific variables from the common variables.

Separate environments by inventory.

=== Group Naming

Name groups with obvious names that describe the function of the groups.

== Playbook

=== Name your plays

Naming everything is best practice because it lets you track down errors faster.

=== Avoid `group_vars` and `host_vars`?

Using `group_vars` and `host_vars` in a playbook requires strict rules of ansible group naming which are best avoided.
It is better practice to have variables for host and group names when a playbook needs different handling depending on the host or host group.
If sets of variables need to be set based on group, try using `include_vars` instead using a check on the hosts groups (`group_names` special variable).

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
- name: Include Database Host Vars
  when: myplaybook_database_group_name in group_names
  include_vars:
    dir: vars/database/
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

== Roles

Start structuring your playbooks around use of Ansible roles early in your development process.
Role directory structure provides a standard for tasks, files, templates, modules, etc.

== Tasks

=== Name your tasks

On every task, always include `name`.

=== User `verbosity` with `debug` tasks

=== Error Handling

Do not `ignore_errors`.
Using `ignore_errors` still reports an error and is often confusing.

Use `failed_when` instead.
Using `failed_when` allows you to give your own error conditions.

https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/user_guide/playbooks_error_handling.html

=== Fail early with `assert` and `fail`

Using `fail`:

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
- name: Check for valid url
  fail:
    msg: Invalid url: {{ myapp_url }}
  when: >-
    not myapp_url.startswith('https://') or
    not myapp_url is search('/myapp/')
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Using `assert`:

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
- name: Assert valid url
  assert:
  - myapp_url.startswith('https://') or
  - myapp_url is search('/myapp/')
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

=== `command` module

* Use sparingly
* Use `quote` filter with variables
* Calling shell scripts from command?
** Template shell script and copy to host
* Don't call `ansible` or `ansible-playbook` from `command`
* Use args:
** `chdir` Set working directory for command
** `creates` Only run if file does not exist
** `removes` Only run if file exists
** `warn` Use to disable warnings when needed

=== `shell` module

Only use `shell` if you cannot use `command`

Avoid `echo` to pass input to commands, the `command` and `shell` modules both have built-in support for passing standard input.

== Variables

=== Avoid `set_fact` unless it is a fact about the host

Set vars on `include_tasks` or `include_role` instead.

=== Include all variables for configuration in `defaults/main.yml`

=== Process variables in `vars/main.yml`

=== Prefix Variable Names

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
myapp_version: latest
myapp_openshift_image: quay.io/myorg/myapp:{{ myapp_version }}
myapp_openshift_dev_nampsace: mapp-dev
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

When registering variables, use `r_` prefix.

== Testing

== Lookup Plugins

=== Use `env` for environment variables

=== Disable use of dangerous lookups

For example, `pipe`

FIXME - I believe you can provide a custom do-nothing version of plugins, but need to verify.

== Filters

Ansible provides a number of filters in addition to the core jinja2 filters.

=== Use `bool` to evaluate boolean expressions

=== Use `default` filter if a value may not be set

=== Use `json_query` filter to process complex data structures

The `json_query` filter uses the powerful JMESPath query language:

http://jmespath.org/

=== Use `quote` filter on commands

=== Use `to_json` filter in generated YAML

== Custom Modules

Custom modules are faster than running multiple tasks and are often easier.
Python programming for modules is not as hard as you may think. To start,
you can add a `library` folder to your module, then create your python code.
Should follow https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/dev_guide/developing_modules_general.html#starting-a-new-module[this document].
The name of the python file, can then be utilized within your ansible-playbook.

== Templating with Jinja2

Ansible lets you use jinja2 templating anywhere. https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/user_guide/playbooks_templating.html[Ansible Jinja2 Templating].

=== Template indentation
